That you're here so that we can, um, get ready
to kick off in just under a minute.
Mr. Chair, we have Jenny Campbell on the call.
I've just sent her a prompt to bring her into the panel.
Thanks very much, Clark.
Okay, Jenny, if you're listening there, if you can, uh,
just respond to the prompt.
Um, we are ready to kick off. There we go.
Uh, Tiana is here as well.
So, um, Jenny,
if you can turn your video on and your mic on.
Um, we have 10 minutes with you this afternoon, uh,
including any time for questions.
So let's fire away.
Just need to turn your mic on there. Jenny.
Jenny, sorry. We can't hear you.
Unmute. There we go.
Right. Okay.
Now I just had to bring up what I want
to say first. Is that okay?
Okay. Thank you.
Um, this is my oral submission on behalf
of Coal Action Network.
It may be small, but it is very precious. Core
Campbell, I'm speaking
as covena of cold action ku, um, acronym CAM
Group, along with personal perspectives, AKA eor,
we are all in this together.
The recommendation from CAM members at is
that the select committee abandons this bill
and that it should not be passed into law.
Cam is very concerned
that this proposed amendment bill shows little consideration
for honoring and giving acknowledgement of teti or wgi.
Consulting with UA is essential in so many industries in
New Zealand to preserve our workable employer
and employee relationships respecting each other.
The Kopa of Eno's long term vision, wisdom, experience,
and MANA depends on working together
in support of each other.
And this is not acknowledged in this bill.
This proposed bill will seriously undermine every work
working person's rights in our Turo,
new Zealand's economy and legal system.
It is a threat to all of us
who support the New Zealand economy by working consistently
and continuing to pay our taxes for the benefit of all.
These are our other main concerns, one
for present union members.
Those cam people are very concerned that the changes
to the 30 day rule will weaken their unions
in their workplaces.
Two contractor law proposed changes in this bill could mean
loss of benefits for employees like sick leave
and holiday pay.
Several older CAM members depend on sick leave
as they become more vulnerable in their older years.
We trust MPS to uphold integrity for the good of all.
This means they must not be influenced by lobbyists.
Three changes
to personal grievances in this bill is another major worry
with it having taken a very long time to win this benefit
for people in the union workforce.
Four, the ability of employers to be able to fire it.
Well become because of the wage threshold.
This bill sets for unjustified dismissal is a real threat
to employees wellbeing and mental health.
Employer and employees are not in an equal playing on
an equal playing field.
We consider this proposal does not set up sound
and ongoing employer
and employee collaborative relationships where are essential
for al Open mutual respect
and equality at the workplace.
Five. This proposed bill amends s six of the ACT
and defines a statutory class of worker
as specified contractor.
It states as this,
that this new worker category will not be given
employment protections.
This is tragic for these workers.
Mis grouping can be a very serious problem in some
workplaces, especially
where workers are not members of unions.
So a very vulnerable, having little bargaining power.
So leading to exploitation. Six.
The proposed bill has now put the onus
on the employee when they make a personal GR grievance claim
not on the employer.
This is a whole change
of responsibility which weakens employee rights
and makes them more vulnerable.
Seven, we consider this proposed bill is intentionally out
of balance as it favors employers
and is set up to increase imbalances of power between
powerful employers and employees who have less power
and feel disempowered.
Workplaces need to build up sound working relationships
with equality and trust at the heart of it in order
to get the best out of everyone's skills, out
of everyone's skills, knowledge,
and the wish to make it a happy and rewarding place to work.
The new law proposes to structurally benefit employers
to take away workers' rights
and protections, which could address these imbalances.
Power imbalances, disadvantage workers eight.
The 30 day rule along for statutory obligations
for employers to facilitate the active choice of work is
to join a union has been removed.
Repealing S 62 A means Unions will not be able
to provide pertinent information about the role
of units unions in the collective bargaining
and worker representation processes to new employees.
This is an unjust process for, for employees
and totally unacceptable.
We feel nine.
This bill expands the effect of 90 day
trial tr trial periods.
This bill ensures
that employers can protect themselves from accountability
for unjustifiable dismissal under a mighty day trial period.
They can also treat a worker poorly if they can connect
that bad behavior with the dismissal of the worker.
We contend this is unjust
and can be seen as malicious 10.
The proposed bill amends, S 1 0 3 A
and weakens the statutory test of justification,
which protects employers from unjustifiable
actions and dismissal.
This change is about employer accountability being minimized
or even removed while worker responsibility
and vulnerability is heightened proposed.
Changes in this bill will take away the good faith aspects
of coming to a just conclusion.
In a situation where good work workplace relationships are
essential conclusion
cab members believe this bill must be
withdrawn in its entirety.
The passing of this bill into law will inflict harm on
employees and undermine constructive
and healthy works site relationships, which employees
and also employers need to be able to give
of their best in a caring
and just work environment to focus toki to
and my submission UA look
back and reflect so we can move forward.
Koto.
Got it. Jenny, uh, is there anyone for a question? Chan
Uh, Kia Jenny,
and thank you very much for your insight for, uh,
submission, uh, and, and,
and also the broad range of impacts, uh, as well.
Uh, that was very helpful. Um, and,
and it reflected on, uh,
what we've been hearing this morning.
But, uh, you touched on one particular point,
which hasn't come through,
and I wondered if you could, uh, uh,
talk a little bit more about that.
And that is vulnerability over time.
Uh, you were saying that this will make, uh,
workers more vulnerable
and as workers get, get older,
there's a particular vulnerability that could happen there.
So I wonder if you could, uh, talk to us, uh,
a a a little bit more about that aspect.
Yes, being in that much older category
and still working, even though I'm long past retirement age,
um, I, I know a lot of people
who get very worried when it comes to that senior part
of their life where they're, um, they may be, um, told,
you know, you're not up to the energy level you used
to have, or, um, we don't need you anymore.
You know, that kind of thing.
And they begin to doubt their abilities to stay in,
um, in work.
And it, the, the whole union process is so that we rep
protect these people who've been working for these firms
for a long, long time
and should have, uh, continuing access
to healthcare and so on.
Holiday pay and that kind of thing.
And it's these vulnerable workers that I, I really feel
for at this stage of my life.
Thank you so much, Jenny. Uh, that's all.
We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've taken to submit and appear live.
Thank you. And thank you for your question. Tiano Koto.
So we've got Dan Mills next.
Dan, I can invite you, uh,
to turn on your video and turn on your mark.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon, Dan,
so we'll hand it over to you,
including any time for questions.
Thank you. Um,
the proposed employment relations amendment bill,
specifically its introduction of an income threshold
for unjustified dismissal presents a significant policy
shift against worker protections.
Um, an analysis of the regulatory impact statement, um,
on this matter from January this year, reveals
that the change is poorly targeted, carries economic risks,
and is likely to undermine job security without
clear benefits to the economy.
The core rationale for the threshold is
to simplify dismissal processes for employees
with a significant impact on organizational performance
and high bargaining power.
Um, however, the government's chosen model an automatic
income threshold set at 180 K fundamentally fails.
Many individuals in the targeted bracket are not senior
executives, but are technicians, trade workers,
senior engineers, IT specialists, and medical professionals.
Uh, these individuals, while they're while compensated,
they don't necessarily have the outsized influence
and negotiation attributed to A CEO,
nor do they possess sophisticated bargaining power
to negotiate individual protections in their agreements.
Um, the consequences of this poor targeting is the creation
of non mutually beneficial arrangements.
RIS itself warns of the risk of dismissing employees who
otherwise would have been successfully performance
managed at a reasonable cost.
It introduces a new layer of inefficiency, um,
and poor outcomes for protections from employees.
Furthermore, the policy overlooks the variable
resilience of high income earners.
The RAS notes that financial resilience increases
with income, though some high income households would
struggle over a sudden loss of earnings,
particularly if there was a single income
supporting larger households.
The erosion of job security as a direct
and negative knock on effect on the economy.
Secure employment is a primary driver of consumer confidence
and discretionary spend.
Professionals on high incomes are significant contributors
to the domestic economy through expenditure on housing,
hospitality, retail, and local services.
Um, introducing uncertainty into their employment status
might incentivize greater financial portion.
Um, this could manifest as reduced discretionary spending,
um, and in an economic environment
that requires robust domestic consumption, uh, policies
that potentially suppress spending
among top earners are counterproductive.
DIS also highlights the likelihood
of unintended legal consequences.
With the path of unjustified dismissal, blocked employees
and their representatives will naturally seek out
other avenues for challenge.
RIS anticipates An increase in breach of contract claims,
the use of bespoke private dispute resolution processes.
This simply shifts the compliance costs
and legal uncertainty from one area of the law to another.
Rather than eliminating it.
It may also lead to a more complex
and protracted litigation, uh, contrary
to the bill stated aim reducing red tape, uh, just like you
to guys to consider the behavior that might manifest
as a result of the legislation.
Some employees be incentivized to cap their income
with reduced hours, reducing productivity
and the supply of the central services,
or move into consulting, essentially charging higher rates
for the same organization, um,
which is gonna further increase costs
and exacerbate the brain drain on
important roles in our economy.
So in conclusion, the government's chosen model
for the amendment is a blunt instrument
that captures a wide SWAT of the workforce
by whom the policy rationale does not apply.
It trades proven employment protections
for an uncertain legal landscape,
and by undermining the job security
of high units at risk stamping the very consumer confidence
and discretionary spending
that are vital to economic growth.
For these reasons, the amendment's unsound
and I urge the committee to re-look at the RAS
and consider damaging the scope
to senior management roles only, um,
or asking people to research more thorough the implications
to all parties rather than just the
rushed anecdotal evidence.
Um, in particular though, uh, I think, uh,
it's this body's role to continue to protect the rights
of the most vulnerable and the contractual arrangements
and provide a more balanced approach
to all parties, not just employers. Thank you.
Thanks, Dan. We've got a time
for a quick question from Glen.
Uh, yeah, Kiata. Dan, thanks for your time.
Uh, in your written submission, you talk about the flawed
of assumption around the power imbalance, um,
the gig economy and jobs.
You talk about sort of the rise of precarious work.
How can we be, um, leaning into that when,
obviously thing we've had DoorDash on this morning
and others, um, who are saying,
you know, they're just contractors.
How do we actually Yeah.
Do you have any way through for us in that?
Um, I think if people go into a contracting role,
typically they're renumerated hire, um,
and that protection that they have is within the extra, um,
which I've just, I suppose mentioned in there.
Um, if, if, if you are, if you go in as a consultant
or a contractor, you're paid an extra
amount of money to be able to cover that.
And that's typically where you get that.
Maybe that's where some of the problem is
with things like DoorDash.
Thanks very much Dan.
Appreciate the time you've taken this morning to present
to the committee, um, and for your recent submission.
Thank you. And now you're invite the team from
N-Z-P-S-A, um,
to turn their mic and their video on
Kiata Kiata.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions. I'll hand it over to you.
Yep. Uh, look, first off, just an apologies.
The, um, we've got our president coming on in, in place
of our ana, if someone could let him in.
Um, she's had a urgent, uh, family matter that she's had
to go away on, so I've asked our president
to step in on her behalf.
Would that be possible? Yeah,
No, no worries.
Just, um, indicate to the clerk. Um, there
We go. He's in.
Um,
Virgil, everyone.
My name's Virgil. I am the president
of the Public Service Association.
Um, I've just been asked to just start with a quick,
so I'll just do that briefly.
Um,
Thanks, vi look, um,
just wanna thank the select committee.
We've, we have had, um, a bit of a, a, a, a mishap
where we didn't have our tu who's, uh, uh,
that has China Houston, who, uh, leads and speaks for the,
but also, uh, Virgil was in that space, uh,
before he was president, so, um, he fits the bill
to be able to step in.
So he's coming in a little bit cold,
but I will help guide him through.
Uh, so look, once again, thanks to the select committee,
been listening to, um, the orals
that have been happening this morning.
And it's just, just wanna make, make one point about this is
that it's good to hear engaged questions coming from the
select committee, that that's, that is really helpful
and that you've actually read.
So I'd like to, um, say, please take the
Ang submission as being read.
Um, there's a couple of points to highlight in this,
and that is that, um,
this submission represents over 10,000 Maori members
of the New Zealand Public Service Association to,
um, and we strongly oppose the Employment Relations
Amendment Bill 2025.
Um, the, the changes that it, that this bill, uh,
is proposing and, uh, to the Employment Relations Act 2000,
um, as we've heard earlier, um, we see
that it will significantly undermine the rights
and protections and wellbeing of workers, um, and,
and from the, uh, position of the UNA specifically, uh,
and particularly and public and community services.
Um, given that we are often at the frontline
of delivering essential services to whanau
and communities, um, Maori, uh, um, disproportionately
affected in a number of metrics.
And we believe that, uh, these, uh, uh, amendment bill will
also affect, uh, Maori workers disproportionately, um,
as you've heard before,
and we'd just like to highlight, um, we see
that these changes are, uh, actually inefficient.
They look to be biased towards the employer, um,
and actually don't, uh, they, they show a lack
of good faith, um, uh, by not, um, allowing
for, uh, better employment conditions, uh,
and working con conditions, which would allow
and acknowledge, um, workers' voice,
but also them, to them have to have better conditions,
which makes sense
because, um, a happy worker means better outcomes
for employers and specifically, uh, for Maori workers.
This has always been a challenge
and continues to be a challenge.
And so as we, uh, go down through our submission,
we do support, and you've probably heard a lot of it before,
but we have highlighted the impact on, uh, Maori workers.
Uh, so I will hand it back now to you, Virgil,
just to just give us a, uh, a brief how
that does impact Maori workers,
and then I'll jump pop in every now and then
and just, um,
grab a few things out of the submission as well. Kilda,
Oh, KDA, for that, Mike and Kilda to the Select committee.
Um, look, just in terms of what Mike has summarized, um,
you know, our response to the bill is the bill undermines
the core purpose of the ERA.
So it just regards the need to address power imbalances
between employers and workers.
Um, it heavily favors employers removing protections
that help challenge unfair treatment.
And all six parts
of the bill threaten fundamental worker rights,
especially for Maori workers.
Uh, Maori workers face greater disadvantage
in seeking redress.
Um, this also weakens union visibility
and ex, um, and access, especially for young Maori.
Maori, Maori workers are more vulnerable
to unfair treatment,
and they just have a few recommendations here.
Look, our recommendation is acknowledge the harm
to Kai Mahi Maori publicly community service workers, um,
oppose all six parts of the bill, uh, call for legislation
that upholds dignity, rights, and wellbeing of all workers.
And the SA Ning endorses CTU
and PSA submission on opposing this bill.
So, as a Maori health worker of more than 10 years,
I've seen firsthand the critical role
that fair employment laws
and collective representation play in insur,
ensuring dignity, safety,
and equity for all workers, especially for, uh, Maori
and Maori who continue to navigate a system
that does not reflect their values and reality.
Elder Mike
Got, um,
and just if I, uh, just drop down to the bottom, um,
the, the workers that we have, uh,
right across the public and community services, uh, Maori.
This, this is just another thing that, that we have
to understand, um, and, uh,
and contend with, given the amount of upheaval
that we've had across, uh, the public service in particular,
um, with, uh, restructure, um, in the,
in the call, uh, for efficiency.
Um, and this, uh, recommendation that
has been put forward, uh, for the amendment does not help,
um, workers, uh, one bit.
So I think we'll, we'll finish there
and just take any questions.
Thanks so much. Are there any questions? Uh, Todd,
Thank you. And thanks for
your submission, gentlemen.
Just you, just on the efficiency point, I don't,
can you just unpack that a little bit more?
I don't quite understand why you, what you mean
by you don't see this as efficient.
Uh, so what, what you've got here is for your need
for efficiency, you've actually excluded the ability
for workers to actually feel safe to actually have a voice.
So that efficiency actually will actually go against, um,
the ability for a worker to actually work in a way
that they actually feel safe.
Because what, what you've done is you've actually put in a
whole lot of, if, if a, if a worker now wants to go
through any one of those parts
and actually have a voice in, in, in a better working place
to deliver better work, um, you are now putting
barriers, or this is announced, not you, sorry, I apologize.
Um, suggesting barriers, um,
and a lack of ability for people to actually point out
or work to actually point out, um, where a change
isn't necessarily a good change, it's just a change
for whatever reason.
And, and I, I put that back when I was working
for the ministry for primary industries, our ability
to impact and, um, have a voice in any change,
um, was basically based on the leadership.
These rules will, will not allow any, um, unfairness
or, uh, inequity in a decision that's made at a higher level
to come through and actually be spoken back to by a worker.
The worker does not actually have the ability to have voice.
And so the inefficiency is
that you don't actually pick that up.
All you do is just drive whatever the reason for making
that efficiency or the reason for having, um, to using
that role or that tool, um, to get an outcome.
It, it's, it that isn't efficient. It,
Thanks so much.
Um, Tiana, a very quick question.
Yeah. I was wondering if you had any thought around, um,
unintended consequences We have heard earlier,
submitters say, uh, well, there's, there's a concern around
that, a chilling effect.
So for example, the minister can get rid of you, um,
or signal to their, the people under them
that they don't like you, uh, that the, the negative impact
that would have on, for example, in the p uh,
in the public service, the ability to give objective
and impartial advice
or any other unintended consequences. You might have thought of
That, that that was kind of like what I was pointing
to when I was answering the efficiency question.
Um, a lot of decisions,
and I'm not saying that this is exactly what this does,
but it allows for political bias to be put onto,
um, an area either by an employer or by,
because they're being pushed to do that.
Um, and therefore it makes it very hard, uh, for a voice
to come through worker or
otherwise, that actually shows
that this probably isn't the best decision.
And how do you go about checking that it isn't, um,
this takes away that ability.
You cannot audit anything that isn't done, um, to see
that you can do things better.
All you can do is all you've done is just cut, made a line
and, and cut people off.
The, the, your, your workers, the people that are in there,
people like Virgil, huge amount of institutional knowledge,
um, which can actually be, uh, circumvented with the use
of this as a tool if inappropriate.
It is done.
Look, thank you for your presentation, um,
and your submission this morning.
Really appreciate it.
We're now gonna invite the woman's network of the PSA, uh,
to come on and turn on your videos and your audio, please.
Uh, hi Alex. Um,
and Kirsten, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning.
Um, and I think Sonya's there as well.
Uh, so I'll hand it over to you. Thank
You. Um, Carol,
my name's Alex Crosby.
I'm here with Sonya Lister
and Kirsten on behalf of the PSA's Women's Network, um,
with the largest union in the country, the majority
of whom are women.
And our role is the Women's Network is to help women
and minority members achieve economic justice.
Um, when we asked though that membership,
what they wanted us to say
and what you most needed to hear today, it was just
that they are tired.
Um, they do not trust
that this government is working in their best interests,
and they're concerned about secrecy withholding the
blindsiding on pay equity.
And now with the extent of changes to the ERA
and other workers legislation, we are in a system
of extreme distrust.
Um, our members aren't really interested in politics.
They just want to go to work for good wages,
under fair conditions,
so they can support themselves and their families.
And we're asking them to repeatedly understand really
complex pieces of legislation to engage
with repeated submissions in this process,
and to understand the nuance of contracts and politics
because they have to,
because the changes are making their lives harder
and making their jobs less secure.
And the four particular issues we wanted
to raise on their behalf is, number one, they can concern
by those changes to the contract
and employee test, um, alongside the feedback today,
they're worried about those basic rights being stripped
away, that the courts had been holding up before,
and that these changes won't represent the true nature
of employment with paid leave, meal breaks, set hours,
all those basic fundamentals at stake.
The second one is
that they're concerned about removing remedies
to personal grievances.
Uh, and they worded it that even the most diligent
of workers often behave in out
of character ways when they're terrified
of losing their livelihood.
So this change puts immense pressure on those workers when
they're engaged in the disciplinary process.
And the third one is
that they're really concerned about the change
to employees earning more than 180,000 being fired at will.
Uh, in the minds of a lot of our network,
there's a real concern that that's putting a limit
or a dollar amount on cases of sexual harassment
and what that discrimination, those changes can look like.
And they're particularly concerned that can be used
for unjustifiable dismissal when an employee has pushed back
against unacceptable behavior.
Um, there's a really strong feeling that the avenues
for harassment aren't always accessible.
And I'll hand over to Sonya, who will cover
Kiara. My name is Son
Ena of the Women's Network.
And, um, we've received considerable feedback on this bill
from our members, many whom are working mothers.
Uh, I wish to bring to the attention, um,
to the committee the significant challenges
that this proposed bill, um, poses for employees returning
to work following maternity or paternity leave.
Uh, given particular that elevated rates of illnesses
amongst young children during their first year in childcare.
This p bill disproportionately impacts working women
who are frequently act as primary caregivers
and are increased risk of unfair dismissal due
to necessary absences for curing
of their dependent children as they Dr.
Develop stronger immune systems.
Additionally, returning mothers offer count
and common illnesses themselves, such as hand, foot,
or mouth diseases, is as a result of not being exposed
for an unex extended period, bringing them more vulnerable
and potentially requiring additional leave
that they may be misunderstood by their employees, sorry
to advance equity and employment is essential
that the bill be mended to ensure fear
opportunities for women.
Such challenges would enable us to, um,
raise our children while cont contributing to, uh,
new Zealand's workplace without the fear
of unwanted dismissal.
Thank you. I'll just, any questions
from the committee? Right?
Questions from the committee? Uh, Chana,
Uh, ki ki thank you very much for your,
for your very substantive, um, uh, submission.
Uh, I, I was wondering, um, just with, with your comments,
Sonya ar around, if you could talk
to us a little bit about the, the change of,
of work over time.
Uh, you were talking earlier about maternity leave
and sometimes people will, they'll take some time off
and then they'll start to move their way back into work.
Uh, how do you think that would, would impact that worker?
That,
Thank you for that question.
Yes. So in terms of returning, um, working mothers
or paternity leave returnees, uh,
they do feel a lot, a lot of stress
and struggles, especially in those first couple of years
to returning from childcare
and the changes internally within processes
and the maybe perhaps lack of, um, trust
and misunderstanding between employers in particular so
that they may render themselves a little bit, um,
vulnerable, especially to raise, uh, pgs against, um,
employers that may misunderstand some certain elements
of childcare or,
or changes in, in their working environment, especially
of likes of flexible working policies,
which may have changed over time and,
and may be not as flexible
or allowing them to, um, do that initial care as well.
Uh, and, and I was wondering if you had, um, any other,
uh, in your mind,
because we have heard from a number of submitters
around potential unintended con consequences, uh, for
through the amendments of this act.
Have you had any other ideas about unintended consequences?
We've heard, for example, um, uh,
suggestions from one submitter that we might,
that the threshold might move from 180 to 130.
Uh, we dunno where the 180 came from.
Um, and so what impact that could have on, on, on work.
Uh, and then also, uh,
we had an earlier submitter talking about the potential
chilling effect of people think they might be just getting
fired because a minister
or some higher up doesn't like what they,
what they, what they think.
Um, do you, do you think there are other unintended
consequences that we haven't, that we need to be mindful of
as a committee as we scrutinize this amendment?
Bill?
I'll let Alex, uh, answer that question. Thank you.
They feel like the key ones, um, it really is that,
that trust in that relationship, it really does feel like
it's not an equally balanced relationship by any means,
but that tip and those really basic rights that sit there
as an employee versus a contractor, that's the main thing
that's coming to mind for me.
And then secondary, just you saying
that might move from 180 down to 130, that, I mean,
the impacts of that would be a massive, um,
check if Kirsten has anything else to add.
I think you're exactly right, Alex,
that the impacts would be massive of moving
that threshold down even further and including
and removing the rights of even more workers
to fair and just treatment.
It's, um, really a license
to poor treatment if you don't provide
any check against that.
So if employers, um, aren't required
to follow a fair process ever, um,
when they're ending someone's employment
where they're putting someone out of work, uh, then
that really does encourage behavior that's not great.
We see a lot of good employers
and we see a few bad employers,
but we would hate to see that bad practice
and bad behavior encouraged.
And I think reducing the threshold
to 130,000 would certainly do that.
And we would, we would, um, really oppose that very strongly
and ask the committee to not consider doing that.
Okay. Any other questions?
I think we should just note that, uh, for anyone listening
that that was a proposal by a submitter, um,
earlier in the day.
Um, thank you very much for taking time to present
to us this morning and, uh, or this afternoon rather, uh,
and for your written, uh, submission.
I'm sure we'll see you again in the future. Ka. Okay.
We've got Gail Duncan, um, joining us.
So if Gail, if you can come on, uh,
and up the screen, turn on your video
and your mark, that would be appreciated.
Gail, we've got you here with us
for five minutes this morning, including any time this
afternoon, including any time for questions.
Please fire away.
Uh, thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak at this hearing.
Um, I really welcome it. My name is Gail Duncan.
I'm an independent economic researcher, professional member
of the Rural Society of New Zealand,
and have work experience in both industry and government.
And I oppose the employment relations bill in its entirety.
I'd like to talk to you about
what I've seen in my working life as a PSA delegate,
the impact of the 90 day rule on employees, both in terms
of feeling insecure in their jobs
and fear of changing jobs
as they might be unemployed after 90 days.
It was very evident from 2013
that removing the 30 days in which an employment contract
can be reviewed against a collective employment agreement,
left new employees very much in the dark about their
employment agreement rights, the introduction of a new class
of worker specified contractors who have no holiday pay,
sick leave, maternity leave, parental leave,
family violence, leave to name a few, no retirement savings,
no minimum wage criteria specified,
and will themselves be responsible for a CC levies
and other criteria could open the doors to exploitation,
particularly of those in contracted casual work
and those with multiple contract jobs
and drive wages to the bottom and tendering for contracts.
In addition to this, the bill introduces higher
to fire tactics for those earning over 180,000 per annum,
which is very low, uh, boundary
and scales back personal grievance options
for all other workers by removing any remedy
for personal grievance.
If the employer was determined to have contributed
to the situation,
this weights the game entirely in favor of the employer.
If this bill is passed, it will be legal for employee
to poorly treat employees options for a fair
and reasonable solution
by good faith bargaining are off the table.
The justification for this bill is
to support greater market flexibility
and going for growth
to deliver higher productivity and wages.
This bill will only deliver reduced wages,
lower opportunities and conditions,
and bring unnecessary hardship
and stress to workers, including the loss
of access to justice.
Just as women workers have been undercut
with the equal pay employment, equal pay amendment bill
and 12.8 billion has been withdrawn from the economy in
terms of wages forfeited.
So a further downgrading of future investment
and spending by workers will be disabled by this bill.
Workers won't be able to pay taxes spend
and investors they could have, which reduces the tax
for the take for the government, the Bill of roads,
workers' rights, and will reduce their future earning
prospects, causing a spiraling downward system leading
to a poorer economic outcome for New Zealand.
This bill permits a tremendous degree of power on the,
on the part of the employer
to impose specified contractor status on employees which
could lead, which will lead to forced misclassification.
Overall, the bill will lead to
unaddressed poor working conditions
and exploitation, which will in turn impact on productivity.
The bill is going in the wrong direction,
undoing the fair labor laws that New Zealand is founded on
passing of this bill will inflict harm due to the asymmetry
of power between the employer and the employee.
It won't reduce red tape
and compliance as a contracting arrangements proposed are in
fact, more complex
and sacrificing workers' rights will not lead to growth.
To conclude, I recommend the Select Committee abandon
abandon this bill in entirely
and go back to the drawing board, defining the issue,
consulting more widely to address all employment
and business concerns while respecting the very important
process of unions and protecting worker rights.
Thank you.
Thanks very much, Gail.
Um, we've got time for our question from Glen,
Uh, Kia. Gail, thanks
for your written and oral submission.
It's, um, powerful.
Um, in your written submission, you talk about living
through the Employment Contracts Act era.
Um, are there lessons you can take from that time
to this piece of legislation
that you wanna share with us, please?
Well, yes. Thank you for the opportunity to share that.
At the time I was a single income, no for a family of four,
two children and one husband.
And, um, uh, I was, it was just so difficult.
Unemployment was high. I was a woman,
so I'm in a disadvantage in the first place.
I actually lost one job because I was a woman
and not considered, um, you know, um,
of worthy status to be maintained.
And, um, and the pressure to just
stay alive and working
and receiving an income to be able
to support your family was awful.
And that was with the,
and then later in 2030 13 was the employment, um,
contracts, uh, sorry, the readmission of the 30 day thing.
I saw many, um, employees, um, you know,
losing out on rights
and opportunities they would otherwise have had.
So that's, that's it from me.
It is very difficult when you are
personally in this situation.
Thanks, uh, very much Gail.
Appreciate the time you've given us and for your submission.
Um, we're gonna move on to our next submitter now.
Thanks a lot. Thank you.
If I can invite the Workers First Union, um,
I think Anita is presenting on their behalf,
if you could turn on your mic, uh,
and turn on your video for us, it'd be appreciated.
Anita, we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Kia, thank you. Over you Kia.
Thanks for having me.
Um, you obviously have our written submission
so you are aware that we are, um,
against this piece of legislation.
Um, my name is Aha Rosen Trader.
I'm the strategic project coordinator
for Workers First Union.
Um, and today I wanted to speak to you, um,
rather than going through sort of
what we've already got in our written submission, I wanted
to speak to you about a few examples of, um, things
that we've sort of dealt with as a union, um,
in the real world that, uh, um,
potentially would've been quite different
if they had occurred under these, um, proposed new laws.
So, to start with, just on the personal grievance
amendments, um, we've got two cases
that I wanna refer to, um, that had particular outcomes
and then talk about how they would've been different under
the new proposals.
The first is, um, Knuth, uh, versus Kmart, which went
to the Employment Relations Authority.
Um, and the second is Harris versus the Warehouse,
which went to the authority
and then to the employment court.
So these are both publicly available.
Um, in the first Knuth versus, um, Kmart, the worker,
Michelle Knuth, was returning
to Kmarts Palmerston North Store where she worked
after a paid break
and saw two security guards being attacked by a shoplifter.
Um, she stepped in to protect the guards, she separated them
and she de escalated the situation.
Um, so the incident was caught on CCTV
and I mean, most people would hear about this
and think, you know, this woman, she's a hero.
Um, she did the right thing.
But unfortunately, what actually happened in the end was, is
that Kmart dismissed Michelle
for allegedly breaching its code of conduct
and what it called its five D's policy, which is headed,
don't be a hero when it comes to your safety.
Under this policy, Michelle, um, was supposed to just
walk away and let the, let the incident continue no matter
what happened to the human beings involved.
Um, thankfully Michelle was able
to raise a personal grievance, um,
and was reinstated to her former role
by the Employment Relations Authority.
Um, if she had raised the personal grievance under these new
propo, these proposed new laws, um,
she would be very unlikely to win reinstatement
if the authority maintained.
It was serious misconduct, which came up labeled it as such,
because obviously the category of the categories
of misconduct and serious misconduct are just
essentially defined by employers,
however they see fit in these circumstances.
Um, if it was found to be serious misconduct conduct,
she wouldn't be entitled to any remedies at all.
Um, and if it was maintained that she contributed, um,
which her employer would, would argue she had
by breaching the policy, she wouldn't be entitled
to reinstatement or compensation.
So it's very likely that at the end of that,
even though she'd absolutely categorically done the right
thing in human terms, that she would lose her job
and also not have any opportunity to, um,
claim for compensation.
The second example, um, Harris versus the Warehouse.
So Margaret Harris was dismissed from her role
as a security guard at the warehouse in Kohi.
A couple entered the shop with a dog, um,
Margaret told them the dog wasn't allowed in a disagreement,
ensued the couple then sent a very racist written complaint
to the company in which they asserted the dog
was cleaner than Margaret.
And Margaret was sacked.
Margaret took a personal grievance to the authority and won,
but her compensation was reduced by a hundred percent due
to contribution.
So she was rude to the customer.
The employment court overturned that thankfully
reinstated Margaret, but still reduced her compensation
by 33%.
So the current system allows for that.
There are consequences already for contribution,
but the proposed new laws would see someone like Margaret
without any available remedies,
what should whatsoever she would be without a job
and without any compensation, all
because of rule breaking customers who had it in for her
because of the color of her skin.
Um, and the last thing I wanted to address, um, is the
proposed, um, amendments to Section six, the definition
of employee, what the average New Zealander thinks
of when they think of workers' rights.
Things like minimum wage, holiday pay, sick leave,
job security, union membership, collective bargaining.
These are all actually employee rights.
If you're not an employee,
you don't have these rights, none of them.
And if you're a genuine contractor, someone in business
of their own accord, you don't actually need them.
You are paying yourself, right?
And so if you need to take time off work, then you know,
you let yourself take time off work.
Um, you take on all the risks and you reap all the rewards.
More and more we have workers
who are being told they're contractors,
but are really employees.
They take on increasing risk,
but are very deliberately locked out of collect,
collecting the rewards.
Uber drivers are quite an egregious example of this.
They shall out for an expensive new car, the fuel,
the insurance, the bulk of the costs of doing business.
Meanwhile, they have no control over the money they make.
Uber decides the fear
and how much the driver is paid from it.
Surprise, surprise, this has equated
to less than the minimum wage.
No matter what a driver does, no matter how well he drives,
how clean or comfortable his car is, no matter
how much he charms the, the passenger, he makes
what Uber decides to pay him.
He's also barred from building up a clientele.
So he has no way of generating goodwill for him himself,
only for the real business here, which is Uber.
Meanwhile, Uber is making billions of dollars
and doing everything it can
to avoid paying taxes here and around the world.
Why would we support such a company
to exploit New Zealanders, use our roads
and other infrastructure to enrich themselves with little
to no benefit for us?
Um, now this idea that people are signing up
to be contractors, so therefore that's what they should be.
Well, most of these workers haven't even read their
so-called contract.
They're impossibly long written in legal gibberish, um,
and tiny text on a teeny smartphone screen
and a big agree button is all that stands in the way
of just getting on with the job.
Companies like Uber don't care
whether you've read the contract.
How can they argue? People are knowingly
and willingly signing, signing up
to whatever arrangement is described within them.
The Uber contract actually says, you are not an employee.
You are not a contractor.
Uh, you're not our business partner.
What it doesn't say is what you actually supposedly are,
which they still haven't been able to articulate.
You know, it could say anything.
The agreement could say you're signing up to be our slave.
And people would still sign it
because they're not, they don't read it,
they're not aware of what's in it.
And as far as they're concerned,
it's a take it or leave it offer.
So they don't have any room to negotiate anyway.
And certainly we wouldn't turn, turn around in
that situation and say, well, too bad you signed it
and therefore you're stuck.
You're stuck as a slave.
Um, and the fact is that these amendments will affect many
more workers than just Uber drivers.
They're being made to the very gateway.
Any worker must pass through to access their rights.
The gig, gig economies,
emergence has effectively put us in a position where we have
to do something, we have to pick a side,
and we have to draw a line.
Unfortunately, these amendments are
going in the wrong direction.
Uh, we need to be protecting workers
and ensuring employers contribute positively to society,
not to as detriment.
Um, these are the main points that I wanted to make, um,
orally in addition to our, our written submission.
So thank you for allowing me to make them
and, um, for giving me your time and attention.
I welcome any questions.
Got time for a quick question. Chana,
Uh, Kiara, Anita, thank you very much
for your very sobering, uh, submission
and thank you for all the work that
Workers Fashion Union does.
Uh, and, and just to acknowledge those two, uh,
examples you gave around remedies being removed, I think
that was very important for the US the committee to hear.
I, I do have a question.
You did talk about these amendments going in the wrong
direction, and from what I'm hearing from submitters today,
everybody, uh, it seems to be going in the wrong direction.
What would it look like if it was
going in the right direction?
Um, I, it's a really good question. Thanks, Tiana.
Um, there's quite a lot of, um, there's quite a lot
of examples of this around the world
because obviously we've all been contending
with the gig economy for the same length of time.
And I guess some people could argue
that New Zealand had a bit of a lag
because we didn't get companies like Uber as quickly as some
of the other countries around the world did.
Um, but it's been long enough that there's been,
been quite a lot of action, um, in,
in regard to these things now.
So we have examples in Europe, for example, there was an,
um, a directive that came from the European Union
to European Union member states,
and it basically just said, um, cut the crap.
These workers are employees all the time, every time.
So you should really just legislate to ensure
that they're recognized as employees no matter what.
Because these companies are so good at ducking
and diving, you know, dodging and weaving, um,
and convincing people
that they're not entitled to their rights.
There's been a number of, um, court cases around the world,
um, that have found in favor of, of, um, gag workers
against their employers, um, particularly against Uber.
And we've, um, won our own ones here as well.
And there's a, a, a case
before the Supreme Court at the moment
that we have a decision for in the coming months.
Um, so I think that, you know,
the courts are doing it for us.
Like we are seeing, um,
we are seeing the line being drawn effectively
for the courts, but if we were going to regulate, um,
we should be doing it to try
and protect workers' rights, not to erode them.
Okay, thanks very much, uh, Anita, that's all.
We've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate, um, your submission. Thank you.
So we're now moving on to the Coman Workers Council.
Uh, Pamela, if you are, uh, there,
if you could turn your video and your mic on.
Um, and we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
Wow, Kia, thank you so much.
Uh, um, Pamela Greeley
and I'm speaking today on behalf of Carman Workers Council.
We are a community based organization
that stands alongside workers across the Carman Peninsula
and, um, slightly further into the h Iraqi area.
Um, we support rural workers, seasonal workers, fauna,
who are already living with uncertainty
in their jobs and incomes.
Um, and we also, um, we set up the workers council
because we can't get union representation
because so many of our people that come to us for help, uh,
are in insecure jobs.
They are in, um, casual contracts.
They're in short hours contracts.
Um, they don't have a regular work schedule.
This view, this bill in our view is the biggest step
backwards for workers' rights in a generation.
Um, it doesn't stand alone.
It comes on top of other recent changes, compounds a crisis
of job insecurity.
And at its heart, the bill tilts the balance
of power further away from ordinary people
and towards employers stripping away protections
that underpin fairness, dignity, and stability at work.
I want to emphasize secure work is not only good
for workers, it's good for employers, for families,
for communities, and for the economy.
This bill erodes
that security at precisely a time when Teo needs it most.
Um, we want to, you know, there's broader economic
and social implications.
Um, as far as we can see the workforce stability
and productivity.
We need to emphasize that insecure work leads
to high turnover, lower productivity,
and less investment in skills
and training, which hurts not only workers,
but also employers in the economy.
And we wanna stress that rural
and small town communities are disproportionately affected
by insecure work, job instability, accelerates,
depopulation, weakens local economies
and undermines social cohesion.
And there's growing evidence
that links precarious employment with higher rates
of stress, mental health struggles,
and poorer health outcomes,
which creates downstream costs for the health system.
Other OECD countries are strengthening workers' protections
to respond to gig economy risk, whereas we are falling
behind if we move in the opposite direction.
And the bill potentially conflicts
with international Labor organization conventions
that we have ratified as, as LT oa, the right
to collective bargaining protection from unfair Dismissal.
And we're in danger of undermining our, uh,
international credibility.
And while the bill appears to give work, uh,
employers more flexibility in practice,
we believe it fosters churn, it reduces trust,
and it discourages employee loyalty, all
of which are very costly to businesses.
And I run a small business alongside my advocacy.
So I do know that this is really a, a, a strong impact.
Um, and we are creating new, weaker categories
of rights like specified contractor, which we're, you know,
we're inviting more disputes
and legal challenges, which adds complexity for businesses,
which I'm sure is in what this bill is, is aimed to do.
Um, I'm also very concerned about the fact that it's looking
to remove dismissal protections for high earners,
which could silence senior employees who would
otherwise challenge unethical or unlawful practices.
And I was talking to, um, a very high earner this morning
who's having a bit of a conflict,
um, with his current company.
And I mentioned this to him
and he said, what do you mean if I earn over $180,000,
I don't have any remedy to take a personal grievance.
And I said, mark, you know, you, you are earning enough.
Maybe they feel that, you know, you've got enough savings.
I've got no idea about his personal circumstances.
But it's just, you know, again, it's another backward step
that you're kind of only certain people can apply
for this for remedies.
Um, and you know, again, with that, women,
Maori Pacifica migrants,
disabled workers are overrepresented in insecure work.
And I believe that this,
these amendments would widen existing inequalities.
Um, I think we should be, um, looking for an opportunity
to reassert a vision
of work in New Zealand grounded in
dignity, fairness, and balance.
And the bill isn't just a technical bill,
it affects the daily lives of family far now
and whole communities.
So this is really for me, what kind
of society do we want to build?
Do we want workplaces where people feel free to safe
and free to speak up to plan for their futures,
to invest in their communities?
Or do we want a future of churn in security and silence?
So I would urge you to reject the substantive provisions
of this bill and instead move forward with employment law
that strengthens balance, fairness,
and dignity for all, which are principles
that have long defined rah as a fair society.
Thank you.
Thanks so much, uh, for that.
Are there any questions from our members? China?
Uh, k Pamela, thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission
and for, uh, particularly
around your comments on potential chilling,
chilling effects this could have on freedom of expression.
I think that was very interesting to hear.
I I I was wondering, um, uh, around unintended consequences,
the, the sorts of impacts you,
you might see at a community like Cora Mandel.
Um, uh, uh, you were talking earlier around, uh, uh,
the impacts on rural workers,
the rural impacts on provincial workers.
Do you have any examples which the, the committee,
what might be interesting
for the committee in your community in, in the koman, uh,
that we should be aware of in terms of impacts on community,
uh, people moving away, that kind of thing? Potentially.
So we, we are noticing there's a big shift at the moment
in much larger companies, um, creating redundancy pools
for people who, who are already in short, short hours works.
Um, and what's happening then is that people are looking at,
they're having to move, they are having to move away.
So they're moving to larger cities
where there's more opportunities for them, which means
that our economy, we've lost a number
of businesses outta the eco um, economy recently.
If you look in Thas, um, which is like one of the big, um,
gateway to the Corman, I think it's is how it,
we've got 19 empty businesses, um,
because they've got no workers.
People aren't there to work for them.
They, they've all gone elsewhere.
They're moving up to Auckland, they're off to Hamilton
because they perceive that there's more opportunity
for them, which in turn means
that what's happening is we are losing our schools
because we can't get the roles there are diminishing
'cause people are moving away
to get their job, um, more jobs.
Um, and then we lose all our services.
We are losing our social services,
our hospitals are suffering.
We can't get teachers, we can't get, this is a real,
a real challenge for rural communities, um, to be able
to stay cohesive because everything then suffers.
And we do see that people are frightened.
They come to us asking us, this is not right.
How do we address it given
all these things that are happening?
Because I don't wanna lose my job and have to move.
Okay. Um, thank you for, um, that answer.
Uh, that brings our hearing to a close
and brings our hearings for, uh, the day to a close members.
So we're now gonna move to the private link. Thank you.